First, Dr. Jones, tell us something about your
early life, including the names and dates and
places of birth of your parents, something about
your parents, if you can remember, and then the
name, I mean, the place and date of your birth and
the schools you attended before you went off to
college. Starting in with my parents, father was
born almost in Galveston, but it happened early in
New York City. And then mother had to get down to
Galveston in the process of the Civil War and had to
run the barricade to get into Galveston where my
grandfather, who went to Galveston in 1838 as a
watchmaker, held forth as a defense captain. And
she was on a sailing vessel and tried to, and got
into port and they bothered, they couldn't find
him. Finally they looked around and found that in
those days where they wore a hoop skirt, he was
under the hoop skirt. And the life during the Civil
War was rather uneventful.
But after that,
his family, father's family, moved up into
Saratoga, New York, where he had some property.
And when father got old enough, he went to college
at what was then a small Presbyterian college,
Princeton, New Jersey. And as soon as he got out, he
came into Texas because he couldn't get Galveston
out of his mind. But the competition was so heavy
that he went up to San Marcos in 1883 and opened up a,
what was very rare in those days, an ice making
machinery, ice factory, where they had to distill
the water in order to get it to freeze quick enough
because their condensing process wasn't what it
became later. He went from there into at the friend
of Frank Ball of Galveston into Temple, 1887,
opened up the Temple National Bank, where he was
president and part owner, and kept in there, and
then he helped open up the First National Bank of
McGregor. Shortly after that, he married in 1889,
the daughter of the president of Baylor Female
College, which had just moved from, had
previously moved from old Independence in
Washington County up to Belton, Texas. And 1889,
1894, I was born in a town of about 3,200, which The
later friends that we had in other states said I was
born in the black land prairie dirt between my
toes. They called it mud. I
helped, was able to be in a neighborhood where the
boys were pretty well schooled with
catch-as-catch-can type of living. learned to
pick cotton, learned to chop cotton, learned to
herd cows. Father took up a little ranch in New
Mexico, but continued to live in Temple. By virtue
of getting a scholarship, I was able to go to
Princeton in 1913,
graduated in 1917, and get into the 10th
Engineers. What was your major at Princeton?
Geology. How did you happen to pick that field? Due
to father. He was a forest, they called him a forest
enthusiast. His enemies called him a forest nut.
And the media's called him a conservation
something. Because whenever they'd have a big
rain in Bell County, the muddy water run down,
somebody would hilariously caught him up and
said, Jones, Bell County's washing into the Gulf.
The Temple is on a branch of the Leon, which goes
into Little River, which goes into the Brazos,
which is known to have had the biggest rise of any
tributary of the Brazos in recorded history,
because in 19, I believe, It was either 1921 or
1919.
Little River rose to such an extent that the
Brazzers River ran uphill from a
place west of Huron on the Brazzers where it runs
over the rocks.
uphill and many of the local settlers in that area
thought earth had come to an end for the river run
uphill well he was familiar with all that history
and passed it on to us
and after the first world war i was been
transferred into this into the service of the rear
where i'd come in close contact with what europe
did with their conservation work with Forrest,
was able to get a job under Mr. Seakey at A&M. You did
serve in Europe then during the First World War.
Eighteen months. In what area? Mostly from the
standpoint of survival in the service of the rear,
in production of railroad ties and aircraft.
stakes for the front and narrow gauge equipment
and temporary huts for use at the front and was able
and was fortunate enough to get on a logging crew
with Minnesota Lumberjacks where in spite of my
size I held my own in a four-man crew in the daily
production. So I would guess from what you said, at
that point Western Europe was somewhat ahead of us
in conservation. Oh my gosh, pardon me, eliminate
that. His father, who had married a German girl in
1890, he had taken my, my grandfather had taken my
father into the forest of Germany just as a matter
of interest to study the Schwarzwald Black
Forest. And he became a forest enthusiast and was
appointed the first individual in Texas to study
the extent of the forest area of East Texas, some
21,000 acres, I think. I'm
mixed up now on my area. of East Texas, and as a
result of that, he was able to get, with the aid of
Dr. Bissell, who helped him compose the ticket, he
was able to get Jim Ferguson to create a State
Department of Forestry in 1914.
Was your father appointed to study the forest area
of East Texas by the state of Texas? No, by the
National Forest Service. U.S. Forest Service.
Without stipend. And he was that enthusiastic, he
used his own funds to canvas the legislature. And
against odds, such as one of the legislators said,
Jones, he said, what are you going to make out of
this if it's passed, this bill on forestry? But he
didn't make anything out of it. In fact, he gave to
it. But with that interest, he thought that maybe
it would be a good thing if I went into that. And Mr.
Seakey gave me a job with Forestry. in charge of the
so-called forest fire prevention work in 1919. I
was able in first division to get out in April 1919
and got quite interested in it but began to see the
advantage of a background in agriculture. Got a an
assistantship under Dr. J. O. Morgan, head of the
Department of Agronomy. That's here at Texas A&M.
At A&M in the fall of 1919 and another
assistantship due to having written some
editorials and letters from the people in the
Houston Tribune on defense of the YMCA and
right in the first world war so i served as
assistant secretary of the y and also as assistant
in agronomy from 1919 to 21. became general
secretary of ymc 21 to 22 and then got our
wanderlust and start teaching in houston and
mathematics 23 and came back to teach under dr
humbert chemistry freshman chemistry in the fall
of 1923,
which was quite a varied background. Yes, it was. I
coached, I organized a wrestling team here in the
fall of 1919, just out of having created a general
interest from a man as small as I was to have made a
public demonstration for the tea club with Oscar
Frazier, who was a middleweight. interested the
students enough to ask for a team. There had not
been one before I think. No, there had been some
interest in it, but we didn't even have mats and we
were able through various means to get some mats
and in the old chapel we had our workout place and
for three years we had a recognized varsity team
and tied Oklahoma A&M in the spring of 22, we got
three first, they got three first, TU got one
first. When you started your classes at A&M for
your master's, did you then leave the employment
of the Forest Service? Yes. So you said you were an
assistant in agronomy plus assistant secretary
of the Y, so you had two, in a sense, two jobs plus
taking courses. If I'd been a better had devoted
more time to wrestling. As a letter sport, it
would have remained, but it didn't give it enough
time after that first three years.
You indicated that you taught chemistry for one
year. Had you had some chemistry background when
you were working on your bachelor's, I take it?
Yes, both as bachelor's and as master's degree.
OK. I believe I picked up in a newspaper somewhere
that you organized a Boy Scout troop in 1923. Yeah,
we had the first Boy Scout troop in College
Station. And outside of three months, the first
one in the county. Dr. Barron beat me too, having
the first in the county. I gather then that at that
point, certainly most of the boys must have been
children of faculty members. Yes. Had you been a
Boy Scout in your younger life? No, I had seen the
first Boy Scouts organized in 19...
I think 1921. It
wasn't too old prior to that. It brought over from
England, and we had two scout organizations at
that time. One survived, the Scouts of America.
And so, well, I gather that you left the campus
pretty soon after that, though, didn't you, to go
on to Cornell for your doctorate? Yes. I had a
friend who was also named Jones, the boys called
him Head End Jones, initialed with B.C. Jones, a
late B.C. Jones, died two years ago, three years
ago, who was a good friend in chemistry, and I had
taught a year in Houston, Central High, and
enjoyed teaching so much, and he said that you
never get anywhere unless you go and do graduate
work. for a doctorate degree. So I took that advice
and
entered Cornell University with a scholarship.
Let's talk a little bit more about your master's
work at A&M. At that point, of course, this was
prior to the creation of the graduate school. Yes.
How did, who then awarded your degree or? Dr. J.O.
Morgan was head of agronomy and was also a graduate
of Cornell and a very able and enthusiastic
advisor and gave me a lot of boost in my research
work of all things in buckwheat or which
economically didn't fit this climate enough to
become a major factor. That was the research for
your dissertation? Yes, sir. Here? Here, yeah.
Was your degree then, I take it, would have come
from the College of Agriculture rather than since
there was no graduate school? Yes, sir. Dean
Pereira and I had several very pleasant Quentin
Ships as did Dr. Fraps in the chemical work that I
did. Did you have to do a proposal for your thesis?
And Dr. Hedges, of course. Did you have to do a
written proposal for your thesis work? Yes, sir.
And had, but I didn't have to pass, for the master's
I didn't have to pass any language. But having
learned German from the time I was seven years old,
it helped me quite a bit in in my language
requirement at Cornell, and the French in the Army
helped quite a bit in the two language requirement
at that time.
Your thesis proposal then, who would you submit
that to? The head of the agronomy department? Yes,
it was to go to Casper Allen Wood, who in turn had We
had Mr. Casper Allen Wood and Dr. J.O. Morgan as the
two advisors on it and for the minor, Dr. C.C.
Hedges. I was aware that you had your master's from
here and I checked and we do have a copy of your
thesis back on file. It's still there with all the
pictures in it.
Let's see, was one of your faculty members here
some influence in your decision to go to Cornell?
Dr. Morgan, it wasn't too easy at that time to get a
fellowship, but Dr. Morgan was very helpful in
getting his personal friend, Dr. T. Littleton
Lyons and Dr. Harry O. Buckman to get that, to get me
into Cornell. And then what did you continue, you
continued with agronomy at that point? Yes, we
called it later soil science. So
did you have some arrangement whereby you could
come back to A&M once you completed your
dissertation, your degree, or was it sort of by
accident that you were able to come back? I was
given, Dr. Morgan said he would like to have me on
the staff, But that's as far as it went. And at
that time and that summer, I started out at
University of Colorado, where incidentally I met
my wife the summer of 24. And I took physical
chemistry there, differential integral
equations and calculus there. And I found out I
didn't decide. With all that chemistry seemed to
offer then, I decided to take Dr. Morgan's and
Joan's advice and take agronomy. And I went on the
way east. I sold my car in Boulder. And on my way
east, I stopped at University of Nebraska,
University of Minnesota, Wisconsin U,
University of Illinois. University of Ohio to
Columbia and Yale to see what I might like there. I
had an uncle, I mean a cousin-uncle, my father's
cousin at Yale at Dean, but I had too many
antipathies from undergraduate work there, but I
wound up at a place, the only place where I had lost
my honors
for an an intercollegiate championship to a
Cornell man. That's where I decided to stay. They
wouldn't promise me a thing as to the length of time
it would take to get a graduate degree at all. But
they did take me on, I was happy to say. And so what,
you were there, what, four years? Three. Three. At
which time? Counting the summers, I was three
years. Uh-huh. At which time you had the doctor's
degree then? I had to do a little extra afterwards.
I got the conferring of the degree in 27. Okay, then
you came here then in 26? Yes. Back to the agronomy
department? Yes. Were you appointed, what, as an
instructor, or did you have a higher ranking than
that? Dr. Morgan gave me a tentative
professorship, which was later.
under Dean Carl was verified as a professor. And
the highest I got ever was an acting head. And I may
honestly say that's as much as I ever deserved. He
was acting head of the agronomy department. For
two sessions, the first 1933 and the second time
1944.
The agronomy department retained that same name
as agronomy the whole time you were in it, did it
not? From 26 through 52. It was later that it became
soil science, soil and crop science section
within that.
What courses did you teach in agronomy? One of my
students, who later became a graduate student,
worked with me and we started the first course in
soil conservation, 1934,
and Red Thompson, Lewis Thompson, who's now dean,
associate dean at Iowa State University. And I
taught the course in soil conservation, general
soils, which While I was in A&M, as a teacher, it was
required two
graduate courses, soil technology and soil
management.
And I filled in during the Depression in helping
Professor Muldford in 105 agronomy. So that's
crops.
Did you have a number of graduate students working
under you at different times? Yes, we had one of the
captain of the track team, Hammonds, Schultz
from Houston County.
Strange to say Houston isn't in Houston County.
Van Tine, who, with my help, we started one on the
transpiration ratio of cotton, and I regret
exceedingly we didn't publish the results due to
some unfortunate occurrences. We did three years
of work on that where we used 55-gallon drums, 12 of
them, for replications. And I found that the water
requirement of a cotton plant was about 105, but we
never did publish it. The water requirement? Of a
cotton plant, meaning it would take 105 pounds of
water for every pound of cotton plant, which at
that time was,
we didn't find too much work on that particular
specific problem.
He was a very remarkable graduate student, but he
unfortunately didn't get to finish his work, and I
didn't either. Was this discovery that you made as
the amount of water necessary, I guess what, to
produce a pound of cotton? Yes, the whole plant,
including the very minor lint and seed. this would
be, what, helpful to people in determining how
much water to use for irrigation? It is used, but in
the Rio Grande Valley, through trial and error,
they found approximately that amount. It varies,
of course, according to the relative humidity.
What about the type? Does the type of soil have any
bearing on it? The physical condition of the soil
would be important. By that, you mean the amount of
humus in the soil or? Well, whether it's a sandy
loam over a clay or a sandy loam over a sandy clay.
This soil here has been referred to as the Lord put
here to tie the Blackland Prairies to the East
Texas sandy land. because of our in-Fergus gray
clay subsoil.
While you were on the teaching faculty, did you
also do some individual research on your own that
is other than assisting graduate students with
their research?
In my first years, I was president of the Science
Seminar and then later the Social Science Seminar
and did slide them out of a little bit of writing but
in productive research that would where we use the
the biometrical methods to determine the quality
of it I did I tried to I was an assistant with Dr.
Ralph Stewart and Dr. Reeves in working on certain
ecological plant relationships. One of them, the
bull nettle, where my main interest was is where
you found the bull nettle, you would find the deep
sandy soil. And otherwise, the value that bull
nettle might produce in making a tapioca. due to
that enormous sub-circuit's growth. But outside
of one article in Journal of the American Society
of Agronomy, I didn't do any. But
you did do a lot of supervising of research. Quite a
bit, and was admitted to the American Association
for the Advancement of Science in
Texas. I was made a fellow in the American
Association for the Advancement of Science and a
fellow in the Texas Scientific
Association.
I didn't finish what I started.
What was your average teaching load? Eighteen
hours. Eighteen hours, which meant that there was
not a whole lot of time for research. To be a good
teacher, using
Watergate terminology, from my view, a man ought
not to have in the soil size more than 25 to 30
students at one time in one class, both from the
pleasure of teaching standpoint and the
communication with the students standpoint. And
where you lecture the classes of 65 to 140, you lose
that, I don't know, as part of that personal
relationship. I would certainly think you would,
yes. Some of the plentiest classes I had was when we
were crowded and I had classes of 25 to 30 and top
deck
of Goodwin Hall where I could remember every boy's
name and his face and his background. And the size
of the class, I take it, was limited by the size of
the room. Yes.
I believe I remember having seen a clipping about
you that indicated that as of a certain date, and I
guess it was about your retirement time, that you
had had at one time or another had about 95% of the
agronomy graduates, I believe, in one of your
courses. Yes, that was in the advanced
soil management.